ESP(1)                           User Commands                          ESP(1)



NAME
       esp - ESP Application Generator for Server-Side Web Applications.

SYNOPSIS
       esp
           --apply
           --appweb configFile
           --cipher cipher DB
           --database DB
           --genlink slink.c
           --home dir
           --keep
           --listen [ip:]port
           --log logFile:level
           --noupdate
           --nodeps
           --optimized
           --overwrite
           --quiet
           --platform [path/]os-arch-profile
           --rebuild
           --routeName name
           --routePrefix prefix
           --single
           --static
           --symbols
           --table name
           --verbose
           --why
           commands ...


       Commands:
           esp clean
           esp compile [pathFilters...]
           esp config
           esp edit key[=value]
           esp generate controller name [action [, action] ...]
           esp generate migration description model [field:type ...]
           esp generate scaffold model [field:type ...]
           esp generate table name model [field:type ...]
           esp init
           esp install paks...
           esp list
           esp migrate [forward|backward|NNN]
           esp mode [debug|release|otherMode]
           esp role [add|remove] rolename
           esp [run] [ip]:[port]
           esp uninstall paks...
           esp upgrade paks..
           esp user [add|compute] username password roles...
           esp user [remove|show] username

DESCRIPTION
       The  esp  command  generates, manages and runs ESP web applications. It
       includes a full HTTP/1.1 web server to host your  application  but  can
       also  help  to  generate  ESP  web  applications, controllers, database
       tables, and scaffolds.

       The esp command will create directories and generate configuration  and
       source code files that can then be manually edited as required.  Esp is
       intelligent and will not overwrite existing files, so  you  can  safely
       edit and regenerate without losing your changes. You can overwrite your
       changes if you wish to by using the --overwrite switch.


RUNNING ESP
       To run ESP to serve documents from the current directory, type:
             esp
             # or
             esp run


GENERATING APPLICATIONS
       To start a new web application, create a directory named for the appli-
       cation.  Then  from that directory run esp to install the required sup-
       porting packs. For example:

             mkdir blog
             cd blog
             esp install esp-html-mvc

       This will will create a set of  directories  that  have  the  following
       meaning:

             client           - Public client web content
             client/assets    - Images and assets
             client/css       - Client CSS and Less style sheets
             client/index.esp - Home web page
             client/paks      - Extension packs
             db               - Databases and scripts
             start.me         - MakeMe build file
             templates        - Template files used when generating

       Other directories will be created as needed:
             cache            - Cache directory for compiled content
             db/migrations    - Databases migration modules
             controllers      - Server side controllers
             src              - Server side main source code

       Most  of  these  directories  are initially empty, but may be used over
       time. ESP follows conventions where specific  files  are  stored.  This
       greatly simplifies configuring a web application.


       Packs  are modules of functionality for ESP applications that are pack-
       aged using the  Pak  utility  (see  http://embedthis.com/products/pak).
       Packs may depend on other packs so that installing a top level pack may
       install other required packs. For example: generating the "esp-angular-
       mvc" pack will also install: esp-angular, angular, less and more.

       See http://embedthis.com/catalog/ for a list of packs.


GENERATING MIGRATIONS
       Migrations are generated code modules that manage portions of the data-
       base. Migrations are used to create tables, initialize with  test  data
       and  optionally  destroy tables. Migrations are typically generated and
       then hand-edited to  include  relevant  initialization  or  test  data.
       Migrations  are  useful  to  quickly  recreate  the  database  with the
       required tables and data.

             esp generate migration DESCRIPTION TABLE [field:type ...]

       The DESCRIPTION is used to name the migration which is created  in  the
       db/migrations directory. A migration is given a unique ordered sequence
       number and the description is appended to this number. The  description
       is  mapped  where spaces are changed to "_" characters. When migrations
       are run, they are run in sequence number order.

       If field:type values are supplied, the database migration will  include
       code to create a column for each specified field of the requested type.
       The valid database types are:  blob,  boolean,  date,  float,  integer,
       string, and text.


GENERATING TABLES
       To generate a database table without creating a migration:

             esp generate table TABLE [field:type ...]


GENERATING CONTROLLERS
       Controllers   are  the  primary  mechanism  for  responding  to  client
       requests.  To generate a controller, run:

             esp generate controller NAME [actions...]

       This will create a controller of the requested name. It will  create  a
       controller  source  file  in the controllers directory. If action names
       are requested, the controller source will define an action  method  for
       each  name.  You  can edit the controller source to meet your needs. It
       will not be overwritten unless you specify the --overwrite switch.


GENERATING SCAFFOLDS
       A scaffold is a generated controller, database  migration,  client-side
       controller  and set of views that provides add, edit and list function-
       ality for the database table.  Scaffolds are useful to quickly generate
       chunks  of the application and prototype web pages and actions for man-
       aging a database table.  To generate a scaffold:

             esp generate scaffold MODEL [field:type ...]

       This will create a scaffold for the specified database table  and  will
       generate a controller of the same name.

       If field:type values are supplied, a database migration will be created
       with code to create a column for each specified field of the  requested
       type.  The  valid database types are: blob, boolean, date, float, inte-
       ger, string, and text. The migration will use  the  name  "create_scaf-
       fold_MODEL" and will be created under the db/migrations direcvtory.

       The  scaffold  will  include an edit action and view page that provides
       add and edit capability. The list action and view, provides the ability
       to list the table rows and select an entry to edit.

       If  the --singleton switch is ues, the controller will be generated for
       a singleton resource and will not have a list action.


COMPILING
       Esp compiles controllers and ESP pages native  code  shared  libraries.
       These  are  then  loaded  and run by ESP in response to incoming client
       requests. Code is compiled only once but can be run many times to  ser-
       vice incoming requests.

       In  development  mode, ESP will automatically compile the relevant por-
       tions of the application if the source code is modified. It can  intel-
       ligently  recompile  controllers  and  ESP pages. However, you can also
       explicilty recompile portions or the complete appliction  via  the  esp
       command.

       Esp can recompile everything via:

             esp compile ....

       This  will  re-compile  all  ESP  pages and MVC applications for routes
       defined in the appweb.conf file.

       Esp also provides options for you to individually  compile  controllers
       and ESP pages. To recompile named pages or controllers:

             esp compile path/*.esp....

            The  arguments  after  "compile"  are  pathname filters. These are
            resolved relative to the current directory.  Only  items  matching
            the filter pathnames are compiled.


       To  compile the entire application and produce a single combined shared
       library file, set the "esp.combo" to true in the package.json file.


AUTHENTICATION
       ESP can use the system password database or it can define passwords  in
       the package.json or in an application database.  To define passwords in
       the package.json, use:

        esp user add username password roles...

       To define authentication roles, use:

         esp role add abilities...


CROSS-COMPILING
       To compile for a target system of a different  architecture,  you  must
       specify  the  target.   To do this, use the -platform switch to specify
       the target architecture. Specify the path to the platform directory  in
       the Appweb source code built for that platform.

            esp -platform /home/dev/linux-arm-debug compile


MODE
       The esp mode command will retrieve and display the "esp.mode" property.
       The esp mode debug command will modify the "esp.mode" property and  set
       it to the "debug" value.  The esp release command will set the esp.mode
       to "release".


RUNNING
       To run your application:

             esp run

CLEANING
       To clean all generated module files:
             esp clean


MIGRATIONS
       Migration files can be run via the esp migrate command. With  no  other
       parameters,  the command will run all migrations that have not yet been
       applied to the database. You can also use esp migrate forward to  apply
       apply the next unapplied migration. Similarly esp migrate backward will
       reverse the last applied migration. You can also use esp migrate NNN to
       migrate  forward  or backward to a specific migration, where NNN is the
       migration sequence number at the start of the migration file name.


COMMANDS
       esp has the following command usage patterns:

             esp clean
             esp compile
             esp compile controllers name
             esp compile path/*.esp
             esp generate app name
             esp generate controllers name [action [, action] ...]
             esp generate scaffold model [field:type [, field:type] ...]
             esp generate table name model [field:type [, field:type] ...]
             esp run
             esp run 4000
             esp mode debug


OPTIONS
       --appweb configFile
             Use the specified appweb config file to host the ESP application.

       --database Database provider
             Use  the  specified  database provider. Set to "mdb" or "sdb" for
             SQLite.

       --genlink slink.c
             Generate a static link initialization  file  for  ESP  pages  and
             applications.   This  is used with --static to generate a appweb-
             StaticInitialize() function that will invoke all  ESP  initializ-
             ers.    By   default,   appweb   expects   this   to  be  in  the
             src/server/slink.c file.

       --home dir
             Change the current working directory before beginning processing.

       --keep
             Keep intermediate source files in the cache directory. This over-
             rides the EspKeepSource setting in the appweb.conf file.

       --listen [ip:]port
             Define the listening endpoint address. This  will  be  used  when
             generating  an  application.  The  value will be patched into the
             generated appweb.conf configuration file.

       --log logFile:level
             Specify a file to log  messages.   The  syntax  is:  "--log  log-
             Name[,moduleName][:logLevel]".   Level  3  will trace the request
             and response headers.

       --nodeps
             Do not install or upgrade dependencies.

       --noupdate
             Do not update package.json.

       --optimize
             Compile optimized without debug symbols.

       --overwrite
             Overwrite existing files.  Ejsweb  normally  will  not  overwrite
             existing  files.  This  is to preserve user changes to previously
             generated files.

       --quiet
             Suppress diagnostic trace to the console.

       --platform [path/]os-arch-profile
             Target platform configuration to build for and directory contain-
             ing  appweb  objects and libraries for the target platform.  If a
             path is supplied, the specified platform directory is used.  Oth-
             erwise,  esp  searches  from  the current directory upwards for a
             parent platform directory.

       --rebuild
             Force a recompile of all items when used with  the  compile  com-
             mand.   When  used  with migrate, this will recreate the database
             and apply all migrations.

       --routeName name
             This selects the Appweb route by name that will be used  for  the
             ESP  configuration.  Routes can be given an explicit name via the
             "Name" appweb.conf directive. Otherwise routes are named by their
             route pattern.

       --routePrefix prefix
             This selects the Appweb route by prefix that will be used for the
             ESP configuration. Routes can be given an explicit prefix via the
             "Prefix"  appweb.conf  directive.  If  the  route prefix does not
             match, the first portion of the route pattern is  tested  against
             the requested prefix.

       --single
             Generate a controller for a singleton resource instead of a group
             of resources. A singleton controller omits a list action.

       --static
             Use static linking when building ESP  applications.  This  causes
             esp to create archive libraries instead of shared libraries.

       --symbols
             Compile for debug with symbols.

       --table name
             Override  the  database table name when generating tables, migra-
             tions or scaffolds. This is useful to request a plural version of
             the model name. Alternatively, specify the model name when gener-
             ating the scaffold, table or migration with  the  desired  plural
             suffix. For example: "-s" or "-ies".

       --verbose or -v
             Run in verbose mode and trace actions to the console.

       --why or -w
             Explain why a resource was or was not compiled.


REPORTING BUGS
       Report bugs to dev@embedthis.com.


COPYRIGHT
       Copyright  (C)  2004-2014 Embedthis Software. Embedthis ESP is a trade-
       mark of Embedthis Software.


SEE ALSO
       appweb



esp                              November 2014                          ESP(1)
